[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We have scientific evidence
that you could create really
coherent brainwave patterns.
And it produces a very
strong signal to the body.
But the signal is not chemical.
The signal is electric.
It's producing a
transcendental state of joy.
The area of the brain that
lights up every single time
when this happens
is the pineal gland,
that little radio receiver
in the back of your brain.
>> In the geometric center
of the human brain is a tiny
cone-shaped gland the size of a
pea, known as the pineal gland.
The pineal gland is responsible
for producing and secreting
the vitally important hormone
melatonin in the body.
But is there another substantial
function of this gland?
Ancient cultures and traditions
revered the pineal gland
for being the key to unlocking
our universal connection
and divine nature.
Could there be any
legitimacy behind
these metaphysical beliefs?
And if so, are there ways to
consciously activate this gland
for spiritual connection?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As an integral part of
the endocrine system,
the pineal gland is a tiny
organ with a long history.
The name pineal comes
from the Latin word pinea,
meaning pine cone, due to the
pineal gland's conical shape.
The gland is often
associated with higher states
of consciousness.
French philosopher René
Descartes called the pineal
gland the seat of the soul
and believed it was the place
in which all
thoughts were formed.
In Indian Hinduism, the
chakra energy system
correlates to the glands of the
endocrine system in the body.
Subsequently, the third
eye, or Ajna chakra,
corresponds to the
pineal gland, which
Hindus believe can serve
as a gateway to becoming
clairvoyant and enlightened.
>> The sixth chakra plugs
into the pineal gland.
The pineal gland has
photoreceptors on it.
And yet, they knew
that thousands of years
ago, before they ever knew
that there were photoreceptors
on the pineal.
So that, to me-- it
shows you that we
know a lot more in
the past than we even
do now with our technology.
>> References to the pineal
gland can also be found
in ancient Egyptian
carvings and artifacts.
Egyptian symbols of the
Eye of Horus and Eye of Ra
both closely resemble
the pineal gland
and where it resides
in the brain.
>> This is what's called a
sagittal section of the brain,
a side view of the brain.
And there's a very
striking resemblance
between the limbic brain
and the Eye of Horus.
And it's important for you to
understand that this represents
some type of inner vision.
Pineal gland has been known
to be called the third eye.
Because once it's stimulated
and activated to the next level,
it gives us profound
inner vision.
>> For most of modern history,
the pineal gland was shrouded
in mystery.
It wasn't until 1958 that
scientists discovered
that the pineal gland was
responsible for producing
and releasing melatonin.
This hormone, derived
from serotonin,
helps to regulate our
circadian rhythms.
>> When we're exposed to light,
it stimulates that pineal
gland.
And serotonin kicks in to
keep us active and aware.
But when we're in
the dark, that's
when melatonin
production kicks in,
triggering a sleepy
or restful state.
And in this state, we may
experience inner visions
and dreams.
>> While serotonin and
melatonin are certainly critical
to the function of our bodies,
it is speculated that there
might be another somewhat
mysterious chemical component
that the pineal gland
also secretes called
N,N-dimethyltryptamine or DMT.
>> DMT is this, you
know, dimethyltryptamine.
The theory is that
it's what's released
by the pineal gland that gives
us these elevated states,
we can say.
>> Maybe DMT is the lens
of our pineal gland,
allowing us to see wider areas
of reality than our normally
accessible to our senses.
>> DMT is a psychoactive
compound that is found
in the human body as well as in
animals and at least 60 species
of plants.
It is also the main
chemical component
of the psychoactive
ceremonial drink, ayahuasca.
>> It's a beverage.
It's made from two plants,
at least one of which
contains dimethyltryptamine.
These are essentially
shamanic practices.
And ayahuasca is at the center
of that traditional mind-body
kind of medicine.
>> In 2013, Professor
Jimo Borjigin and her team
discovered the presence of DMT
in the pineal glands of rats,
leading them to hypothesize
that the pineal gland might
synthesize DMT.
However, more
recent studies found
that the two enzymes needed
to bio-synthesize DMT
were not only found in
the pineal glands of rats,
but in other parts
of the brain as well.
When dimethyltryptamine is
isolated from its source,
it is considered an illegal drug
in most countries worldwide.
When taken this way, the
effects are nothing short
of mystical with users
reporting similar experiences
of encountering strange
entities and traveling
outside of time and space.
>> One of the things that's
unique about DMT is that it
seems to get one into a state
where there is an intelligence.
And so there's been
a lot of speculation
as to what that might be.
Might it be
extradimensional beings?
Or might it just be activation
of certain areas of the brain?
>> Scientists are currently
unsure of the role of DMT
in the body.
But a theory popularized
by Dr. Strassman
is that the pineal gland
releases DMT in large amounts
while dreaming and when we die.
Accounting for the
mystical near-death
experiences that
some people report,
this hypothesis found
some support in 2018
when researchers found that
after inducing cardiac arrest
in rats, DMT levels in
the brains of 60% of them
rose more than two fold.
As if finding DMT in the pineal
gland wasn't mysterious enough,
another recent discovery
was quite baffling.
In 2002, scientists made
the exciting discovery
that calcite microcrystals
exist on the pineal gland,
and that these
crystals can interact
with electromagnetic fields.
>> These crystals have
piezoelectric properties with
excitability in the
frequency range of mobile
telecommunications.
They theorized that
the interactions
of these crystals
with global system
for mobile
telecommunication waves
could constitute a new
mechanism of transduction
of the pineal membrane.
What this means
in layman's terms
is that our pineal
gland is a cell phone.
The wireless transmitter
that links us
with the universal consciousness
is our pineal gland.
>> Using these latest
discoveries in his work,
brain researcher Dr. Joe
Dispenza is teaching people how
to activate the pineal
gland in order to recapture
the spiritual connection that
he believes is everyone's right
to access.
>> Now, what if you were to
take one slow, steady breath?
And as you slowly
follow your breath
and you can track those
intrinsic muscles--
as you follow your breath,
and you bring that breath
all the way up to
that pineal gland,
and you hold your
breath, and you
keep your attention
on that pineal gland,
that's your target.
The act of contracting
those muscles,
along with the holding
of your breath,
would begin to push
cerebrospinal fluid right up
into your brain.
And as you begin to
hold your breath,
you're pushing that
cerebrospinal fluid right up
against the crystals
of the pineal gland.
And then the mechanical stress
begins to electrically activate
those crystals.
And we are turning on the
radio receiver in the brain.
>> In addition to meditation,
there are other techniques that
people claim can activate the
pineal gland for spiritual
awakening.
In addition, a 2013 study at
the University of Melbourne
found that Wi-Fi
signals interfere
with the function of the pineal
gland to produce melatonin.
And so experts suggest shutting
it off before going to bed.
Overall, the gland
and its functions
are still very much a
mystery to modern science.
It's possible that
ancient civilizations
may have known about
the pineal gland's
amazing spiritual potential,
though that knowledge seems
to have been lost
to the modern world.
But it is certain that
this tiny endocrine
gland has a history of mysticism
that spans thousands of years.
Perhaps the time has
come to reconnect
with our own pineal
glands and explore
our ancient spiritual roots.
[MUSIC PLAYING]